The Theogony of Hesiod

Chaos was first of all, but next appeared broad-bosomed Earth, the solid and eternal home of all, and Eros, the most beautiful of the immortal gods, who loosens the limbs and subdues both mind and sensible counsel in the breasts of all gods and all men.

From Chaos came Erebus and black Night, and from Night came Aether and Day, whom she bore after union in love with Erebus.

Earth first bore starry Sky, equal to herself, to cover her on all sides and be a secure home for the blessed gods. She bore also the high mountains, graceful haunts of the goddess Nymphs who dwell in the wooded hills. She also bore the unharvested sea with its raging swell, Pontus, and this without sweet union of love.

But afterwards, lying with Sky, she bore deep-eddying Oceanus, and Coeus and Crius and Hyperion and Iapetus, and Theia and Rhea and Themis and Mnemosyne, and gold-crowned Phoebe and lovely Tethys.

After these came youngest-born Cronus, the crafty one, most fearsome of her children, who hated his vigorous father. Again, she bore the Cyclopes, strong of heart: Brontes and Steropes and stubborn-hearted Arges, who gave Zeus his thunder and fashioned the thunderbolt.

These were like the gods in all respects except that a single eye lay in the middle of their foreheads, and they were called Cyclopes because of this circular eye that lay upon their brows.

Cronus took his great sickle and cut off the genitals of his father Sky. And when he had cast them from the land into the surging sea, they were carried over the waters for a long time, and white foam arose around the immortal flesh, and in it grew a maiden. First she came near holy Cythera, and thence she came to sea-girt Cyprus. And out came a goddess, lovely and revered, and grass grew beneath her delicate feet.

Her gods and men call Aphrodite, because she was nurtured in foam, and Cytherea, because she approached Cythera, and Cyprogenes, because she was born in billowy Cyprus. And with her went Eros and fair Desire as she was born and went first to the gathering of the gods.

Zeus, who gathers the clouds, was greatly angered in his heart when he saw the might of the far-shooting fire. And straightway he made an evil thing for men as the price of fire; for the very famous Lame God formed of earth the likeness of a shy maiden as the son of Cronus willed.

And the goddess bright-eyed Athena girded and clothed her with silvery garments, and down from her head she spread with her hands a broidered veil, a wonder to see; and she, Pallas Athena, put about her head lovely garlands, flowers of new-grown herbs. Also she put upon her head a crown of gold which the very famous Lame God made himself and worked with his own hands as a favor to Zeus his father.

This was Pandora, the first of womankind, and from her comes the race of women and female kind. From her is the race of women and female kind: of her is the deadly race and tribe of women who live amongst mortal men to their great trouble, no helpmeets in hateful poverty, but only in wealth.
